This directory contains some demonstration programs using Windows-api Wrapper
(ww) library.

To execute these programs, start piw and load them, or specify program name as
the argument to piw. To compile programs, use Makefile in the directory.
Makefile defines macro WWLIB at the top lines, select one according to C
compiler you use.

minimal.scm	Minimal sample. Does nothing othe than displaying window.

hello1.scm	Displays string in its window.

hello2.scm	Centers string display.

hello3.scm	Menu and dialog box are added.

scrib.scm	Draw figure with mouse.

calcpad.scm	Mimicks calculation pad. Make cell by dragging mouse. Each
		cell has label and expression. Labels contain arbitrary string
		and expressions contain S-expression of Scheme. Value of
		expression is displayed in each cell. You can use '?' macro
		discussed later to refer value of other cell. Re-calculation
		occures in the order of cretion of cells and no means to change
		this order is implemented. Selecting the menu item
		Window->Console opens another window and read-eval-print loop
		is executed in it. You can evaluate any Scheme expression in
		this window and the following macros and procedures are defined
		to refer and minipulate cells.

		(? cell-label)
			Refers the value of cell. Specify the label of cell
			in the place of cell-label as string or symbol.

		(! cell-label)
			Refers the cell itself. Use this as cell argument in
			the following procedures.

		(calc:cell-position cell)
			Upper left coordinate of cell.

		(calc:cell-size cell)
			Width and height of cell.

		(calc:move-cell cell x y)
			Move cell to (x,y).

		(calc:resize-cell cell w h)
			Change size of cell to (w,h).

		(calc:recalc cell)
			Re-calculate cell.

		(calc:recalc-bis cell)
			Re-calculate all cells after specified cell.

		(calc:recalc-all)
			Re-calculate all cell.

		(calc:reload)
			Re-load current sheet.

		(calc:new-cell x y w h caption)
			Create new cell.

		(calc:delete-cell cell)
			Delete the cell.

		(calc:select-cell cell)
			Select the cell.

		(calc:set-caption cell caption)
			Change label of cell.

		(calc:set-expression cell exp)
			Change expression of cell.

		(calc:on-load exp)
			Make exp to be evaluated when sheet is loaded.

life.scm	Conway's game of life.
